wikidataopensym2014-acm.md, before:

---
title: Collaborative creation of a Wikidata handbook
author:
- name: Jakob Voß
  refaddr:
  - Hochschule Hannover / Verbundzentrale des GBV
  - Hannover / Göttingen
  email: jakob.voss@gbv.de
date: 2014-04-30
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.11249
category:
- '\category{I.7.1}{Document and Text Processing}{Document and Text Editing}[version control]'
- '\category{I.7.2}{Document and Text Processing}{Document Preparation}'
abstract: This article describes the theoretical and practical background of a collaborative writing project resulting in a handbook on Wikidata and authority control. The handbook was created by an untrained group of students during three month in spring 2014. It was written in Pandoc Markdown in a git repository at Penflip.com.
...

# Introduction

The paper "Collaborative creation of a Wikidata handbook" was accepted for a
short experience report at the OpenSym '14 conference community
track.^[<http://www.opensym.org/os2014/submission/community-track-call/>] For
inclusion in the conference proceedings, authors are required to assign
exclusive publishing rights to the publisher ACM. Never in my life have I fully
given away rights on my publication instead of just releasing everything as
Open Access. For this reason this text the full text of the paper has been made
available as public domain at <https://zenodo.org/record/11249> with DOI
[10.5281/zenodo.11249](http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11249). 

# Summary

Despite its name and topic, OpenSym conference does not commit to the goals of
Open Access and Open Content movement by publishing the conference proceedings
at ACM. The height of Open Access fees such as demanded by ACM and similar
publishers is ridculous given that all work is done by authors and conference
organizers for free. If all authors would just publish their works in open
repositories, they could better be judged by theit content instead of the name
of a publisher.

Commit message:

ACM copyright note and DOI

wikidataopensym2014-acm.md, after:

---
title: Collaborative creation of a Wikidata handbook
author:
- name: Jakob Voß
  refaddr:
  - Hochschule Hannover / Verbundzentrale des GBV
  - Hannover / Göttingen
  email: jakob.voss@gbv.de
date: 2014-04-30
category:
- '\category{I.7.1}{Document and Text Processing}{Document and Text Editing}[version control]'
- '\category{I.7.2}{Document and Text Processing}{Document Preparation}'
abstract: This article describes the theoretical and practical background of a collaborative writing project resulting in a handbook on Wikidata and authority control. The handbook was created by an untrained group of students during three month in spring 2014. It was written in Pandoc Markdown in a git repository at Penflip.com.
permission: Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
copyright: Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3016-9/14/08...$15.00.
conference:
  short: Opensym (WikiSym) '14
  full: August 27-29, 2014, Berlin, Germany
doi: 10.1145/2641580.2641631
...

# Introduction

The paper "Collaborative creation of a Wikidata handbook" was accepted for a
short experience report at the OpenSym '14 conference community
track.^[<http://www.opensym.org/os2014/submission/community-track-call/>] For
inclusion in the conference proceedings, authors are required to assign
exclusive publishing rights to the publisher ACM. Never in my life have I fully
given away rights on my publication.  The full text of the paper has been made
available as public domain at <https://zenodo.org/record/11249> with DOI
[10.5281/zenodo.11249](http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11249). It's full source
code and slides are available at <https://github.com/jakobib/opensym2014> .

# Summary

Despite its name and topic, OpenSym conference does not commit to the goals of
Open Access and Open Content movement by publishing the conference proceedings
at ACM. The height of Open Access fees such as demanded by ACM and similar
publishers is ridculous given that all work is done by authors and conference
organizers for free. If all authors would just publish their works in open
repositories, they could better be judged by theit content instead of the name
of a publisher.
